packages/webgpu-renderer/README.md, before:

# WebGPU Renderer (Prototype)

This package is a renderer-only prototype for GenomeSpy. It is intentionally
low-level: WebGPU only, marks + WGSL shaders + GPU resources. There is no
dataflow engine, view hierarchy, or expr/param system here. The caller is
responsible for updating uniforms, feeding columnar data, and scheduling renders.

It is designed to be usable outside GenomeSpy: a generic, low-level library
for GPU-accelerated visualization. It currently lives in the GenomeSpy
monorepo to satisfy GenomeSpy’s requirements, but it may grow beyond them.

## Purpose

- Provide GPU-accelerated scales and rendering for visualization marks.
- Accept columnar, typed-array inputs (storage buffers + vertex pulling).
- Keep the public API small and data-first.

## What This Is (and Is Not)

- **Is:** a low-level rendering backend you can drive from another system.
- **Is not:** a full visualization grammar or runtime (no transforms, layout,
  or declarative spec handling in this package).

## Core Concepts

- **Series channels** are columnar buffers (`TypedArray`) uploaded to storage
  buffers.
- **Value channels** are uniforms (scalar or vectors). If `dynamic: false`, the
  value is inlined into WGSL to enable shader optimizations.
- **Scales** run on the GPU. Domains and ranges are updated per mark.

## API (Public Surface)

- `createRenderer(canvas, options)`
- `renderer.createMark(type, config)`
- `renderer.updateSeries(markId, channels, count?)`
- `renderer.updateValues(markId, values)`
- `renderer.updateScaleDomains(markId, domains)`
- `renderer.updateScaleRanges(markId, ranges)`
- `renderer.updateGlobals({ width, height, dpr })`
- `renderer.render()`
- `renderer.destroyMark(markId)`

Type definitions live in `packages/webgpu-renderer/src/index.d.ts`.

## Custom Scales (Experimental)

You can register custom scale metadata with:

```js
import { registerScaleDef } from "@genome-spy/webgpu-renderer";

registerScaleDef("myScale", {
    input: "numeric",
    output: "f32",
    domainRange: true,
    params: [],
    continuous: true,
});
```

This registers the scale in the validation registry. WGSL emission hooks will
be added in later phases of the scale-def consolidation.

## Quick Example

```js
import { createRenderer } from "@genome-spy/webgpu-renderer";

const renderer = await createRenderer(canvas);
const markId = renderer.createMark("rect", {
    channels: {
        x: {
            data: new Uint32Array([0, 1, 2]),
            type: "u32",
            scale: { type: "band", domain: [0, 1, 2] },
        },
        y: { value: 0, type: "f32", dynamic: true },
        fill: { value: [0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0] },
    },
});

renderer.updateScaleRanges(markId, { x: [0, canvas.width] });
renderer.render();
```

`count` is optional when at least one series channel is provided. The renderer
infers it from the series buffer lengths. For value-only marks, the count
defaults to `1`, so pass an explicit value when you want a different count.

## Series Buffer Sharing

If multiple channels reference the same `TypedArray` at mark creation, the
renderer treats them as a shared series buffer and reuses a single GPU binding.
Sharing is determined by `TypedArray` identity and stays fixed for the mark.
When updating series data, all channels in the group must be updated together
with the same array instance (you can swap to a new array as long as the group
stays shared). Array lengths may change. If you need a different sharing
pattern, recreate the mark.

## High-Precision Index Scale

The `index` scale supports large coordinate spaces with fractional domain
starts for smooth zooming/panning.

- **u32 series:** use `Uint32Array` and `inputComponents: 1`.
- **Large indices:** pass `Float64Array` series with `inputComponents: 2`.
  The renderer packs values into `[hi, lo]` u32 pairs internally.

Domain updates accept JS numbers. For advanced usage, you can pre-pack domains
or series with the helpers exported from `src/index.js`:

- `packHighPrecisionU32`, `packHighPrecisionU32Array`
- `packHighPrecisionDomain`

## Examples

Open `examples/basic.html` in a WebGPU-capable browser. Use a local server
because ES modules do not load from `file://` URLs.

## Storybook (Dev)

Storybook is set up for interactive examples and knobs.

- Start: `npm -w @genome-spy/webgpu-renderer run storybook`
- Build: `npm -w @genome-spy/webgpu-renderer run build-storybook`

Note: Storybook is pinned to 8.x for now because the 10.x addon set is not
fully published yet. The upgrade notice is safe to ignore.

## Tests

- GPU tests: `npm -w @genome-spy/webgpu-renderer run test:gpu`
- Type checks: `npm -w @genome-spy/webgpu-renderer run test:tsc`
- Unit tests: `npx vitest --run --config vitest.config.js --root packages/webgpu-renderer`

Commit message:

feat(webgpu-renderer): add conditional selections

packages/webgpu-renderer/README.md, after:

# WebGPU Renderer (Prototype)

This package is a renderer-only prototype for GenomeSpy. It is intentionally
low-level: WebGPU only, marks + WGSL shaders + GPU resources. There is no
dataflow engine, view hierarchy, or expr/param system here. The caller is
responsible for updating uniforms, feeding columnar data, and scheduling renders.

It is designed to be usable outside GenomeSpy: a generic, low-level library
for GPU-accelerated visualization. It currently lives in the GenomeSpy
monorepo to satisfy GenomeSpy’s requirements, but it may grow beyond them.

## Purpose

- Provide GPU-accelerated scales and rendering for visualization marks.
- Accept columnar, typed-array inputs (storage buffers + vertex pulling).
- Keep the public API small and data-first.

## What This Is (and Is Not)

- **Is:** a low-level rendering backend you can drive from another system.
- **Is not:** a full visualization grammar or runtime (no transforms, layout,
  or declarative spec handling in this package).

## Core Concepts

- **Series channels** are columnar buffers (`TypedArray`) uploaded to storage
  buffers.
- **Value channels** are uniforms (scalar or vectors). If `dynamic: false`, the
  value is inlined into WGSL to enable shader optimizations.
- **Scales** run on the GPU. Domains and ranges are updated per mark.

## API (Public Surface)

- `createRenderer(canvas, options)`
- `renderer.createMark(type, config)`
- `renderer.updateSeries(markId, channels, count?)`
- `renderer.updateValues(markId, values)`
- `renderer.updateScaleDomains(markId, domains)`
- `renderer.updateScaleRanges(markId, ranges)`
- `renderer.updateSelections(markId, selections)`
- `renderer.updateGlobals({ width, height, dpr })`
- `renderer.render()`
- `renderer.destroyMark(markId)`

Type definitions live in `packages/webgpu-renderer/src/index.d.ts`.

## Custom Scales (Experimental)

You can register custom scale metadata with:

```js
import { registerScaleDef } from "@genome-spy/webgpu-renderer";

registerScaleDef("myScale", {
    input: "numeric",
    output: "f32",
    domainRange: true,
    params: [],
    continuous: true,
});
```

This registers the scale in the validation registry. WGSL emission hooks will
be added in later phases of the scale-def consolidation.

## Quick Example

```js
import { createRenderer } from "@genome-spy/webgpu-renderer";

const renderer = await createRenderer(canvas);
const markId = renderer.createMark("rect", {
    channels: {
        x: {
            data: new Uint32Array([0, 1, 2]),
            type: "u32",
            scale: { type: "band", domain: [0, 1, 2] },
        },
        y: { value: 0, type: "f32", dynamic: true },
        fill: { value: [0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0] },
    },
});

renderer.updateScaleRanges(markId, { x: [0, canvas.width] });
renderer.render();
```

`count` is optional when at least one series channel is provided. The renderer
infers it from the series buffer lengths. For value-only marks, the count
defaults to `1`, so pass an explicit value when you want a different count.

## Series Buffer Sharing

If multiple channels reference the same `TypedArray` at mark creation, the
renderer treats them as a shared series buffer and reuses a single GPU binding.
Sharing is determined by `TypedArray` identity and stays fixed for the mark.
When updating series data, all channels in the group must be updated together
with the same array instance (you can swap to a new array as long as the group
stays shared). Array lengths may change. If you need a different sharing
pattern, recreate the mark.

## Selections & Conditional Encoding

The renderer supports selection-driven conditional encoding on the GPU. A
channel can declare conditions that switch between literal values or full
channel+scale branches. Selection predicates are always evaluated in data
domain space.

- `single`: a selected `uniqueId` (u32 uniform).
- `multi`: a set of selected IDs (hash-table buffer).
- `interval`: numeric range over a specified channel (vec2 uniform).

Conditional channel branches are normalized into internal synthetic channels
(`fill__cond0`, etc.) for shader generation; users only define conditions on
the original channel.

## High-Precision Index Scale

The `index` scale supports large coordinate spaces with fractional domain
starts for smooth zooming/panning.

- **u32 series:** use `Uint32Array` and `inputComponents: 1`.
- **Large indices:** pass `Float64Array` series with `inputComponents: 2`.
  The renderer packs values into `[hi, lo]` u32 pairs internally.

Domain updates accept JS numbers. For advanced usage, you can pre-pack domains
or series with the helpers exported from `src/index.js`:

- `packHighPrecisionU32`, `packHighPrecisionU32Array`
- `packHighPrecisionDomain`

## Examples

Open `examples/basic.html` in a WebGPU-capable browser. Use a local server
because ES modules do not load from `file://` URLs.

## Storybook (Dev)

Storybook is set up for interactive examples and knobs.

- Start: `npm -w @genome-spy/webgpu-renderer run storybook`
- Build: `npm -w @genome-spy/webgpu-renderer run build-storybook`

Note: Storybook is pinned to 8.x for now because the 10.x addon set is not
fully published yet. The upgrade notice is safe to ignore.

## Tests

- GPU tests: `npm -w @genome-spy/webgpu-renderer run test:gpu`
- Type checks: `npm -w @genome-spy/webgpu-renderer run test:tsc`
- Unit tests: `npx vitest --run --config vitest.config.js --root packages/webgpu-renderer`
