docs/grammar/composition/concat.md, before:

# View Concatenation

The `vconcat` and `hconcat` composition operators place views side-by-side
either vertically or horizontally. The `vconcat` is practical for building
genomic visualizations with multiple tracks. The `concat` operator with the
`columns` property produces a wrapping grid layout.

The spacing (in pixels) between concatenated views can be adjusted using the
`spacing` property (Default: `10`).

## Example

### Vertical

Using `vconcat` for a vertical layout.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed>

```json
{
  "data": { "url": "sincos.csv" },

  "spacing": 20,

  "vconcat": [
    {
      "mark": "point",
      "encoding": {
        "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
        "y": { "field": "sin", "type": "quantitative" }
      }
    },
    {
      "mark": "point",
      "encoding": {
        "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
        "y": { "field": "cos", "type": "quantitative" }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

### Horizontal

Using `hconcat` for a horizontal layout.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed height="200">

```json
{
  "data": { "url": "sincos.csv" },

  "hconcat": [
    {
      "mark": "point",
      "encoding": {
        "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
        "y": { "field": "sin", "type": "quantitative" }
      }
    },
    {
      "mark": "point",
      "encoding": {
        "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
        "y": { "field": "cos", "type": "quantitative" }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

### Grid

Using `concat` and `columns` for a grid layout. For simplicity, the same
visualization is used for all panels in the grid.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed height="400">

```json
{
  "data": { "url": "sincos.csv" },
  "encoding": {
    "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
    "y": { "field": "sin", "type": "quantitative" }
  },

  "columns": 3,
  "concat": [
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

## Child sizing

The concatenation operators mimic the behavior of the CSS
[flexbox](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/a-guide-to-flexbox/). The child
views have an absolute minimum size (`px`) in pixels and an unitless `grow`
value that specifies in what proportion the possible remaining space should be
distributed. The remaining space depends on the parent view's size.

In the following example, the left view has a width of `20` px, the center view
has a grow of `1`, and the right view has a grow of `2`. If you resize the web
browser, you can observe that the width of the left view stays constant while
the remaining space is distributed in proportions of 1:2.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed height="50">

```json
{
  "data": { "values": [{}] },

  "spacing": 10,

  "hconcat": [
    {
      "width": { "px": 20 },
      "mark": "rect"
    },
    {
      "width": { "grow": 1 },
      "mark": "rect"
    },
    {
      "width": { "grow": 2 },
      "mark": "rect"
    }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

The size may have both absolute (`px`) and proportional (`grow`) components.
When views are nested, both the absolute and proportional sizes are added up.
Thus, the width of the above example is `{ "px": 40, "grow": 3 }`. The spacing
between the child views is added to the total absolute width.

Views' size properties (`width` and `height`) accept both SizeDef objects and
shorthands. The SizeDef objects contain either or both of `px` and `grow`
properties. Numbers are interpreted as as absolute sizes, and `"container"` is
the same as `{ grow: 1 }`. Undefined sizes generally default to `"container"`.

Concatenation operators can nested flexibly to build complex layouts as in the
following example.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed height="150">

```json
{
  "data": { "values": [{}] },

  "hconcat": [
    { "mark": "rect" },
    {
      "vconcat": [{ "mark": "rect" }, { "mark": "rect" }]
    }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

## Resolve

By default, all channels have independent scales and axes.

Commit message:

feat(core): optimize `concat`'s default scale resolution for track-based layouts
Default to `"shared"` if `"locus"` or `"index"` data types are used in
all children.

docs/grammar/composition/concat.md, after:

# View Concatenation

The `vconcat` and `hconcat` composition operators place views side-by-side
either vertically or horizontally. The `vconcat` is practical for building
genomic visualizations with multiple tracks. The `concat` operator with the
`columns` property produces a wrapping grid layout.

The spacing (in pixels) between concatenated views can be adjusted using the
`spacing` property (Default: `10`).

## Example

### Vertical

Using `vconcat` for a vertical layout.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed>

```json
{
  "data": { "url": "sincos.csv" },

  "spacing": 20,

  "vconcat": [
    {
      "mark": "point",
      "encoding": {
        "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
        "y": { "field": "sin", "type": "quantitative" }
      }
    },
    {
      "mark": "point",
      "encoding": {
        "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
        "y": { "field": "cos", "type": "quantitative" }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

### Horizontal

Using `hconcat` for a horizontal layout.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed height="200">

```json
{
  "data": { "url": "sincos.csv" },

  "hconcat": [
    {
      "mark": "point",
      "encoding": {
        "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
        "y": { "field": "sin", "type": "quantitative" }
      }
    },
    {
      "mark": "point",
      "encoding": {
        "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
        "y": { "field": "cos", "type": "quantitative" }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

### Grid

Using `concat` and `columns` for a grid layout. For simplicity, the same
visualization is used for all panels in the grid.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed height="400">

```json
{
  "data": { "url": "sincos.csv" },
  "encoding": {
    "x": { "field": "x", "type": "quantitative" },
    "y": { "field": "sin", "type": "quantitative" }
  },

  "columns": 3,
  "concat": [
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" },
    { "mark": "point" }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

## Child sizing

The concatenation operators mimic the behavior of the CSS
[flexbox](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/a-guide-to-flexbox/). The child
views have an absolute minimum size (`px`) in pixels and an unitless `grow`
value that specifies in what proportion the possible remaining space should be
distributed. The remaining space depends on the parent view's size.

In the following example, the left view has a width of `20` px, the center view
has a grow of `1`, and the right view has a grow of `2`. If you resize the web
browser, you can observe that the width of the left view stays constant while
the remaining space is distributed in proportions of 1:2.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed height="50">

```json
{
  "data": { "values": [{}] },

  "spacing": 10,

  "hconcat": [
    {
      "width": { "px": 20 },
      "mark": "rect"
    },
    {
      "width": { "grow": 1 },
      "mark": "rect"
    },
    {
      "width": { "grow": 2 },
      "mark": "rect"
    }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

The size may have both absolute (`px`) and proportional (`grow`) components.
When views are nested, both the absolute and proportional sizes are added up.
Thus, the width of the above example is `{ "px": 40, "grow": 3 }`. The spacing
between the child views is added to the total absolute width.

Views' size properties (`width` and `height`) accept both SizeDef objects and
shorthands. The SizeDef objects contain either or both of `px` and `grow`
properties. Numbers are interpreted as as absolute sizes, and `"container"` is
the same as `{ grow: 1 }`. Undefined sizes generally default to `"container"`.

Concatenation operators can nested flexibly to build complex layouts as in the
following example.

<div><genome-spy-doc-embed height="150">

```json
{
  "data": { "values": [{}] },

  "hconcat": [
    { "mark": "rect" },
    {
      "vconcat": [{ "mark": "rect" }, { "mark": "rect" }]
    }
  ]
}
```

</genome-spy-doc-embed></div>

## Resolve

By default, all channels have independent scales and axes. However, because
track-based layouts that resemble genome browsers are such a common use case,
`vconcat` has a special treatment for the `x` channel: if all child views use
`"locus"` or `"index"` data type on the `x` channel, the resolution defaults to
`"shared"`.
